WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Good evening.
I'm William Brangham.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
nationwide manhunt
is under way in Turkey for the
attacker who
killed 39 people on New Year's
Eve.
Also ahead, we launch our series
The Obama
Years.
Tonight, we explore President
Obama's conservation
legacy, a look at the outgoing
president's
groundbreaking moves securing
federal lands
and waters.
JULIET EILPERIN, The Washington
Post: I think
there's no question that he is
one of the
most consequential presidents
when it comes
to the environment.
He really has made it a
centerpiece of his
domestic policy and even his
foreign policy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Plus: seeking
justice for
the victims of the genocide in
Rwanda, the
difficult road bringing war
criminals to court.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They're still
searching
tonight for the man behind the
latest terror
attack in Turkey.
He left 39 dead and nearly 70
wounded, and
a claim of responsibility came
today, even
as police said they're getting
closer to identifying
the suspect.
It's the clearest look yet at
the alleged
gunman who attacked the Reina
club early New
Year's morning.
Turkish officials say he rained
bullets and
explosives on holiday revelers.
The deputy prime minister said
the investigation
is progressing.
NUMAN KURTULMUS, Turkish Deputy
Prime Minister
(through translator):
Information about the
fingerprints and basic
appearance of the terrorist
have been found.
We hope that we will find not
only the terrorist,
but also his connections and
those who gave
him support inside and outside
the club.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hours earlier,
the Islamic
State group claimed
responsibility, and called
the gunman a heroic soldier of
the caliphate.
The statement said: "The blood
of Muslims
that is being shed by Turkey's
airstrikes
and artillery shelling will turn
into fire
on its territories."
Turkey has been a key member of
the air campaign
against ISIS and has sent troops
into Syria
in part to fight the group.
Still, Turkey's military vowed
to continue
strikes on Islamic State
fighters.
And it released new footage of
air raids on
ISIS positions in Syria.
Meanwhile, in Istanbul,
survivors of the nightclub
attack painted a more detailed
picture of
the mayhem that occurred early
Sunday.
MAN (through translator): As
soon as he entered
the club, he started firing and
he didn't
stop.
He fired nonstop for 20 minutes
at least.
We thought that there were
several of them
because it just didn't stop.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The site is a
popular attraction
for tourists, and the majority
of the victims
were foreign-born.
One American citizen was wounded
in the attack,
but returned home today.
It was the latest in a string of
bloody incidents
and security lapses to take
place on Turkish
soil.
Just two weeks ago, a gunman
assassinated
the Russian ambassador.
And, in June, three suicide
bombers struck
Istanbul's Ataturk Airport,
killing 45 people.
That attack was also blamed on
ISIS.
In the day's other news: The new
year is off
to a deadly start in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated a
truck bomb today
at a busy Baghdad market,
killing at least
36 people.
The Islamic State group claimed
responsibility.
The bomber pretended to be
looking to hire
day laborers and then set off
the explosion.
In addition to the dead, 52
people were wounded.
Later, appearing with the
visiting president
of France, Iraqi Prime Minister
Haider al-Abadi
vowed to beat ISIS.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (through
translator): I ask the security
forces and
the Iraqi people to be alert.
The terrorists are again
attacking civilians.
I promise the Iraqi people and
the French
president and all the countries
suffering
attacks by the Islamic State
group that we
are fighting to finish them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This was the
third attack
claimed by ISIS in as many days
in and around
Baghdad.
Sixty miles to the north, in
Samarra, gunmen
wearing suicide vests attacked
police stations
late today, killing at least
seven officers.
In Brazil, a riot at a prison
left at least
60 inmates dead.
There were chaotic scenes
outside the prison
in northern Amazonas state as
the killings
erupted inside.
Authorities said several of the
inmates were
beheaded or dismembered.
Others escaped.
Officials blamed a fight between
members of
two crime gangs for the attacks.
Back in this country, 2016 ended
as one of
the most violent years ever in
Chicago.
The city saw 762 homicides, the
most in two
decades.
That's more than New York and
Los Angeles
combined.
And there were 1,100 more
shooting incidents
in 2016 than the year before.
President-elect Trump tweeted
his reaction
to these numbers, saying: "If
mayor can't
do it, he must ask for federal
help."
In another series of tweets, the
president-elect
also dismissed those who
questioned whether
he'd win last fall.
Trump said he thought he'd
easily get more
than the 270 electoral votes
needed.
He ended up with 304.
Hillary Clinton won the popular
vote by nearly
2.9 million.
Also today, Trump spokesman Sean
Spicer played
down findings about Russian
hacking.
He told FOX News -- quote --
"There is zero
evidence that they influenced
the election."
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Turkey's
struggle to stop an onslaught of
terror attacks;
a new year and a new president,
looking ahead
to politics in 2017; plus,
looking back on
the president's effort to
conserve millions
of acres of land and water.
the president's effort to
conserve millions
of acres of land and water.
We return now to Turkey and this
weekend's
deadly attack in Istanbul.
What's behind that terror
incident and the
string of terror attacks in
Turkey that have
taken place over there over the
past year?
We drill down on this with
Bulent Aliriza.
He directs the Turkey Project at
the Center
for Strategic and International
Studies.
Welcome.
ISIS has claimed responsibility
for this latest
attack on New Year's Eve.
Do you think the evidence will
point that
they're in fact the
perpetrators?
BULENT ALIRIZA, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Well, we do have a
statement by ISIS
that, in fact, it was
responsible for this
outrage in Istanbul.
It's actually the first time
that ISIS has
claimed responsibility for
terrorist acts
in Turkey, although a number of
acts of terrorism
have been attributed to ISIS.
The method of operation by the
gunman -- apparently,
it was a single gunman involved
-- very much
suggests that this was ISIS.
And, as I said, there is a
statement by ISIS
that it did it.
And, also, it's important to
note that, back
on November 2, soon after the
assault on Mosul
began, Baghdadi, the leaders of
ISIS, made
a statement, part of which was
devoted to
Turkey, in which he asked his
followers to
move against Turkey because
Turkey had become,
as he called it, an apostate
state and, therefore,
attacks against Turkey were
warranted.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Turkey has
obviously been
suffering attacks not just from
ISIS, but
also from Kurdish militant
groups.
For those people who haven't
been following
this closely, can you explain
this sort of
two-front attack on Turkey?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, it's
exactly as you
put it, a two-front attack on
Turkey.
Turkey has been grappling with
Kurdish separatist
terrorism all the way back to
1984.
There have been efforts to
actually solve
the problem, the Kurdish problem
within Turkey.
But they essentially collapsed
in the middle
of 2015.
Since then, Turkey has been
reengaged in fighting
against the PKK, which is the
Kurdish separatist
terrorist organization.
More recently, it's been
challenged by ISIS.
Now, either of these challenges
would be daunting
for any state around the world.
The scourge of terrorism
bedevils the entire
world.
But for a country to have to
fight two very
potent terrorist organizations
within its
borders, within its capital
city, within its
most important city, Istanbul,
the way that
it's been forced to during the
past 15, 18
months, is frankly very, very
difficult.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: How has
Erdogan been responding
to these attacks thus far?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, he and his
ministers
have been saying that the
security forces
will eventually defeat
terrorism.
Now, that's a daunting task, as
I said, for
any state around the world.
Even the U.S. has not actually
-- with all
the effort that is made to deal
with terrorism,
not got to the position where it
says the
terrorist threat to the U.S. is
over.
Now, in Turkey's case, the fact
that it's
to the north of two ongoing
wars, in Syria
and Iraq, where some of the
terrorists who
are actually also intent on
harming Turkey
are active makes it so much more
difficult
for Turkey to try to solve the
problem within
its borders, given the fact, as
I said, that
it comes from without.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean,
Erdogan is also,
as we speak right now, going
through this
very lengthy purge of officers
up and down
the government that he argues
were involved
in this recent coup attempt.
How does that complicate their
fight against
terrorism within their own
borders?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, it
complicates it immensely,
because dealing with these two
threats was
difficult enough, and then we
had a failed
coup attempt on July 15.
The government has moved against
the followers
of Fethullah Gulen that it
alleges were involved
in this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is the
religious figure
who is here in the U.S. that
Erdogan argues
was behind the coup.
BULENT ALIRIZA: And the Turkish
government
has asked for his extradition,
and that has
not happened so far.
It's one of the reasons why
there is tension
between Ankara and Washington
currently.
Now, there has been a purge.
The attention of the government
has been directed
at rooting out of the system
those it believes
to be involved or are somehow
implicated or
are sympathetic to the coup.
And parallel to that, you have
the twin threats,
the unprecedented twin threats
from ISIS and
the PKK, and that is taxing the
capabilities
of the Turkish state.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Syria is also
involved in
these -- I'm sorry -- Turkey is
also involved
in some of the cease-fire that
has been going
on in Syria.
Is there any sense that you have
that, if
things were to calm down there
and the cease-fire
were to really hold, that that
might ease
some of the pressure on Turkey?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well, it could,
but the Turkish
position, which is now
coordinated with Russia,
is predicated on Turkey's
ability to persuade
the opposition fighters, many of
whom Turkey
has been backing for the past
five years,
to essentially lay down their
guns and to
accept Bashar al-Assad as -- at
least for
the foreseeable future, as the
president of
Syria.
And that clearly is going to be
difficult
for some of the opposition
groups to accept.
And the ability of Turkey and
Russia to actually
hold the cease-fire and bring
lasting peace
to Syria is something that I
have grave doubts
about.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lastly, very
quickly, we
obviously have a new
administration coming
in.
Do you think the Trump
administration, this
will change the calculus for
him?
BULENT ALIRIZA: Well,
inevitably, there will
be a different emphasis once the
president-elect
takes office.
There has been growing tension
between President
Erdogan and President Obama.
The U.S.-Turkish relationship
has been going
through a very difficult period.
Clearly, there are hopes in
Ankara that it
will be easier with a new
administration.
But it's unclear exactly which
way the new
administration is going to go
with Turkey
or with the Middle East or,
frankly, with
the rest of the world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Bulent Aliriza,
thank you very much for being
here.
BULENT ALIRIZA: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The new
Congress starts
work this week, and Republicans
will have
majorities in the House and
Senate.
And very soon they will have a
Republican
president as well.
So, what's high on the GOP's
agenda?
It's Politics Monday.
And I'm joined, as always, by
Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report and
Tamara Keith
of NPR.
And this week, they are also
joined by our
very own Lisa Desjardins.
Happy new year.
Welcome to you all.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Happy
new year.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Happy
new year.
LISA DESJARDINS: Glad to be
here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lisa, I want
to start with
you.
You were just up on the Hill.
What is high on the GOP's list?
LISA DESJARDINS: I could go into
a lot of
details, but essentially
dismantling the eight
years of the Obama presidency.
And they're going to start right
away with
actions that lead toward the
repeal of the
Affordable Care Act.
It's complicated.
In the end, it's going to be a
three-step
process, but they are going to
start with
the process this week with votes
Tuesday,
Wednesday.
They're also going to try and
set up a process
where they can start immediately
rolling back
some Obama regulations.
Think about the environment in
particular.
And then there is going to be
potentially
a drawn-out fight over some of
these Cabinet
nominees.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's talk
about the ACA
there in particular.
How is that going to look?
AMY WALTER: Well, that's really
-- we all
are going, well, nobody quite
knows.
Even Republicans don't quite
know.
Ever since the Obamacare passed,
Republicans
have campaigned on dismantling
it.
And yet here we are, with a
Republican Congress
about to come in, a Republican
president about
to come in.
They have a dismantling plan,
but not a how
to replace it plan.
And that is...
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They have got
the repeal
part down.
AMY WALTER: The repeal part, not
the replace
part down, which is where all of
the real
action, when Lisa talks about
how complicated
it is, the replacing it.
I will tell you, just in talking
with voters,
even post-election, and I'm sure
you saw this
too during campaign, the
frustration that
voters have about Obamacare,
especially in
the last week before the
election, when notices
went out that their premiums
were rising,
is cost, very simply.
And I think, for Republicans,
the danger is
that, at the end of the day, if
they repeal
this and do not replace it with
something
that helps to bring costs down,
that they
are then going to get blamed for
not fixing
something that they also didn't
feel particularly
good about what Obama did to it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: And something like
43 percent
of Americans actually support
the Affordable
Care Act.
Now, that's obviously not a
majority of Americans,
but that's 43 percent of people
who you really
don't want to upset.
Also, there are something like
20 million
people who have gotten health
insurance as
a result of the Affordable Care
Act.
There are people who have gotten
expanded
Medicaid, even in Republican
states.
And you have seen some
Republican senators
say things like, well, we don't
want -- let's
not rush to do that just yet.
You know, we need to find
something for these
people who've gotten health
coverage who didn't
have it.
So, the most unpopular parts of
Obamacare
also come with popular parts of
the law that
aren't necessarily advertised as
part of the
Affordable Care Act or things
that people
realize are part of it.
And repeal gets rid of all those
things, which
is why there is a lot of
fuzziness about replace
or like whether they would phase
in the repeal.
And maybe even -- I have seen
the idea that
it could be pushed as far back
as past the
next presidential election.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, they would
repeal it
perhaps this week on paper...
TAMARA KEITH: On a delay.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ... but then
push off the
actual replace part.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's even more
complicated
than that, thank goodness.
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: The repeal
probably will
be at the end of the month.
There are three steps.
But we don't even need to get
into that.
The problem is they have -- in
this whole
conversation -- I'm sure our
viewers are picking
up on it -- a space-time
continuum problem
with how they do this, because
there are people
who want the repeal to happen
right away.
The truth is, a system like this
Obamacare
or any health care system takes
a lot of time,
and there are many Republicans
who want to
say, we want to take our time
figuring out
the replacement.
There are many other Republicans
who say,
no, we have to do it in this
first year for
a couple of reasons.
One is the pressure on them.
Second is, they know, the first
year of the
new president is one of the only
times in
recent history that you can get
anything done.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
let's move on
to Trump's nominees.
He's put forward almost all of
his nominees
for Cabinet positions.
The Democrats are obviously
going to have
to pick which fights they want
to have here.
Who do you think?
Who are you likely to see stand
out as a place
where the Democrats try to hold
their ground?
AMY WALTER: Well, they are going
to pick on
pretty much everybody, it looks
like, at this
point, with the Democratic
leadership saying,
we're going to picking eight
people and we're
going to spend all of our time
and energy
poking at them.
Look, they don't have the votes
to deny his
Cabinet picks.
What they can do is try to
slow-walk the process,
make it painful.
The question is, is there some
sort of backlash
to that?
Is the American public going to
be interested
in seeing a food-fight on
Capitol Hill, when
they said what we voted for was
to see the
American public -- or to see
Congress move
ahead?
The American public is tired of
watching the
dysfunction in Washington.
At the same time, you have got a
bunch of
Democrats who no longer have any
leadership
position.
Right?
They don't control the House or
Congress.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They're in the
wilderness.
AMY WALTER: Right.
They're totally in the
wilderness without
an obvious leader.
They need to have something to
cling to and
to give to their base to fire
them up and
keep them motivated.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: These fights could
definitely
-- they could be very good for
the base.
They could make the base feel
good.
You have somebody like a Steven
Mnuchin for
Treasury, who headed a bank,
helped take over
a bank that had failed, and that
bank ultimately
foreclosed on thousands of
homes.
Lots of banks were foreclosing
on thousands
of people's homes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: But you have the
potential for
Senate Democrats to bring out
people who lost
their homes because of that bank
that he headed.
They can make it very painful.
They can -- they can use this --
Democrats
can use this to try to poke some
holes in
the idea of a Donald Trump as
populist.
That's why also they are
particularly interested
in these very, very wealthy
people that Trump
has nominated for positions like
Commerce.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: His Cabinet of
billionaires.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: And, William,
the Democrats
are pushing especially hard to
try and get
tax returns for all of these
nominees.
They are probably not going to
get them.
That's not a requirement.
And it wasn't required of the
Obama nominees,
Republicans like to point out.
So Democrats are holding these
nominees to
a higher standard than the Obama
nominees,
they say, but these are
billionaires.
They have complicated financial
dealings.
Rex Tillerson, nominee for
secretary of state,
we want to know his exact
relationship with
Russia.
The question is, like Amy is
saying, how much
do you -- how much do they go
out there -- how
many of these battles do they
pick?
What do they lose with the
public as a new
president with sort of a wind at
his back
is coming in by choosing right
now eight of
these battles?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But you don't
think really
that no one is going to get
derailed?
LISA DESJARDINS: No, it doesn't
sound like
it.
Tom Price, the HHS nominee and
current member
of Congress, is someone to
watch, because
The Wall Street Journal and
others have reported
that he invested in health care
stocks while
he was writing health care law.
That's something to watch.
But other than that...
AMY WALTER: But I think that
Lisa raises a
really good point, which is,
there is always
something that is unexpected,
surprises, if
we can recall 1992 and the
so-called nanny
problem that...
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: There was an
outbreak of nanny
problems.
AMY WALTER: There were outbreaks
of nanny
problems.
And remember this was a
president-elect who
wasn't necessarily expecting to
win, and people
around him not necessarily
expecting it.
A lot of these people have been
moved very
quickly through this process.
Maybe not a whole lot of vetting
had been
done early enough, and when the
vetting comes
out in public, it is a lot
messier.
LISA DESJARDINS: It's a
question.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things that Trump
talked about soon after the
election was he
wanted to put forward a big
infrastructure
spending plan.
And President Obama tried the
same thing right
after he was elected, and the
GOP had no appetite
for it at the time.
Do you think, Tam, that there is
going to
be a change of heart now, now
that it's Trump
in the driver's seat and he
wants to spend
a lot of money?
Are they interested?
TAMARA KEITH: Not necessarily.
Just because Donald Trump
campaigned on it
doesn't mean that he's going to
get open arms
from Congress.
And even Mitch McConnell has
said, whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa, whoa.
You know, this is not a
front-burner issue
for a lot of Republicans in
Congress.
It's sort of a back burner.
And so it's not the thing that
is going to
be pushed through quickly,
because it is big
government spending.
And, you know, there is an
argument that could
be made that the stimulus that
President Obama
pushed through was very large,
very hard to
communicate to the public.
A lot of people didn't
understand it, thought
their taxes were going up, when
they were
actually being cut, and that
that was an albatross
around him that lasted
throughout his presidency,
that even though it actually
created jobs,
it ultimately set up the
Republicans to sort
of be oppositional from the
beginning, that
maybe he overreached.
And so there is not a lot of
appetite.
LISA DESJARDINS: A quick note on
that, something
I'm watching for, is I wonder,
because what
is front burner for Republicans
in Congress
is they have been -- it's almost
like the
turkey has been on the table and
they just
couldn't carve it for years --
is tax reform.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: They have felt
so close to
tax reform, and it just hasn't
happened.
They think it can happen.
They are dying to do it.
And there's a possibility that
perhaps we
see some sort of tax credit
incentive that
helps build infrastructure,
rather than a
classic stimulus plan, at least
to start.
We will watch.
AMY WALTER: And think back to
where President
Obama was at this point when he
was coming
in, a lot of expectations about
what he was
able to do.
Eight years later, really, you
look back,
to Lisa's point, he was able to
get most of
it done, almost -- any of it
done in his first
two years.
And even then, he spent the last
four years
defending it.
Trying to push through more than
one or two
things is really, really
difficult.
They will be lucky if they get
-- and I think
the priority, from what I'm
hearing from folks
on the Hill, is pretty much
simple.
It's taxes and it's Obamacare.
What will be interesting, what
we're not hearing
about is something that Donald
Trump talked
a lot about, whether it's
infrastructure or
building that wall.
Those are two things that you're
not hearing
about in Congress.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Tam, Amy, Lisa,
thank you all very much for
being here.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The election
proved the
United States is more divided
than ever, rich
from poor, rural citizens from
urban dwellers.
Has the American elite become
isolated from
the rest of society?
Do you, yourself, live in a
bubble?
That's the question we asked in
2016 in our
online quiz created for
"NewsHour" by conservative
thinker Charles Murray.
We had hundreds of thousands of
responses.
And Murray just finished
crunching the data.
See what he found out on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
preserving history
and literature in the digital
age; and prosecuting
the Rwandan genocide, one
couple's mission
to track down perpetrators of
the massacres.
But, first, we begin our series
on the legacy
of President Obama's time in
office.
Our series is called The Obama
Years.
And over the next two weeks, we
will examine
the successes, review his
administration's
failures, and highlight the
battles that will
continue during president-elect
Trump's tenure.
Tonight, we start with President
Obama's legacy
on conservation.
In his eight years in office,
President Obama
has permanently banned oil and
gas drilling
on hundreds of millions of acres
of federally
owned land in the Arctic and
Atlantic oceans.
He's canceled oil and gas leases
on land owned
by the Blackfeet Nation in
Montana.
He's also used his executive
power 29 times
to create new national
monuments, protecting
more than 553 million acres of
water and land.
That's more than the last 18
presidents combined.
In August, he more than
quadrupled the existing
marine national monument in the
Pacific Ocean
near Hawaii, creating the
largest protected
area on Earth.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Nature is actually resilient, if
we take care
to just stop actively destroying
it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last week, the
president
set aside two new national
monuments, Bears
Ears National Monument in Utah
and Gold Butte
National Monument in Nevada.
Environmentalists and Native
American groups
love the move, but critics have
called it
an egregious and arrogant
federal land grab.
With a new Republican Congress
and administration
coming in just a few weeks,
there are questions
about whether these efforts
might be rolled
back.
Last week, I talked with The
Washington Post's
Juliet Eilperin about Obama's
legacy.
And I began by asking her about
the significance
of these two most recent
monuments.
JULIET EILPERIN, The Washington
Post: They're
both, for slightly different
reasons.
Gold Butte is an area.
It's roughly 300,000 acres, just
about an
hour's drive from Las Vegas.
And it's got incredible
petrified sand dunes,
rock art.
It's a very important habitat
for the imperiled
desert tortoise.
And while it's this area where
people go to
hike and enjoy, it's also right
at the heart
of where Cliven Bundy and his
family live.
This is a family that's been at
odds with
the federal government for
years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This is the
family that
was involved in the standoff in
2014 in Nevada
and then the other in Oregon.
JULIET EILPERIN: Exactly, and
then also the
occupation of the Malheur
National Wildlife
Refuge in Oregon.
And so they have failed to
recognize federal
authority for over -- well over
a decade.
They have been illegally grazing
there.
And so their property is right
adjacent to
this area that was declared a
national monument.
So it's quite an interesting
area for that
reason.
Bears Ears, in southeastern
Utah, which is
a larger parcel of land we're
talking about,
1.35 million acres, is an
incredibly important
ancestral Pueblo site.
And so...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A Native
American site.
JULIET EILPERIN: So, it's a
Native American
site where there are many
tribes, some of
whom live near there and some of
whom have
actually moved to other areas,
who consider
it an incredibly important and
significant
place.
People still go there to collect
firewood
and collect herbs for
ceremonies.
They see it -- it has been a
literal refuge
over the years, as well as
obviously kind
of a spiritual refuge.
And so that's very important.
But there are real divisions
there.
While a lot of people think it
should be protected,
there are real questions about,
again, the
role of the federal government.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, these both
are considered
two of the more controversial of
Obama's designations,
right?
JULIET EILPERIN: Absolutely.
Essentially, he spent many years
doing ones
that -- where there was broad
consensus on
the ground, where there was very
little controversy.
And we have seen, as he gets
towards the end
of his term, he's been making
slightly riskier
designations.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With regards
to the criticism,
particularly in Utah, there was
a lot of blowback
there.
Orrin Hatch, both of the
senators, it seems
like every elected official in
Utah was against
this.
JULIET EILPERIN: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What about the
criticisms
that they have?
What are they arguing that Obama
shouldn't
have done?
JULIET EILPERIN: What they were
arguing wasn't
that this area didn't deserve
protection,
but that they felt that the
president shouldn't
do it unilaterally.
Lawmakers there had been working
for over
three years to draft legislation
that would
have included that area, as with
well as six
other counties, where they were
trying to
do a mix of development and
protection, give
some lands to the state that
they could use,
some lands would go to the
federal government.
And so they were looking for a
broader land
compromise.
That bill stalled in the House
and didn't
pass, and that's why the White
House argued
it had the right to, at this
point, move on
its own.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Obama used this
fairly old act, the Antiquities
Act, to designate
these.
Are these on pretty good legal
footing going
forward?
JULIET EILPERIN: Yes.
One of the things that's really
interesting
about this act that dates back
to 1906 is
that it's fairly broadly worded
and that you
have had presidents from both
parties use
it frequently and to protect
areas.
And when -- usually, it has
stood up to challenges
in court, that basically the
presidents are
given broad latitude to exercise
the authority.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, is there
any sense,
though, that if the Trump
administration comes
in -- and there's a lot of very
pro-drilling
interests in the potential
Cabinet of the
Trump administration -- is there
any way that
they could carve these back?
JULIET EILPERIN: They could.
So, one thing that would be very
straightforward,
where there is really no legal
controversy,
is that Congress could pass a
bill reversing
these moves.
And if the president signed it,
that would
effectively end -- kill off the
monuments.
So, that could be done.
What Republicans are asking
President Trump
to do is do it on his own.
That has never been done.
Presidents have on occasion
altered the boundaries.
In one case, Woodrow Wilson cut
a monument
that Teddy Roosevelt created in
half.
But there is kind of no court
precedent for
what would happen if a president
on his own
reversed it.
There is a legal opinion dating
to 1938 which
says the president can't do it,
but that's
not been tested in court.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: More broadly,
how do you
see these particular
designations fitting
into Obama's overall
conservation legacy?
JULIET EILPERIN: I think they
are very interesting
and significant for a couple of
reasons.
The first is that the president
has tried
to broaden the definition of
what is American
history and what is our
heritage.
And so he really has focused on
recognizing
areas that, for example,
recognize everything
from black history, to LGBT
history, women's
history, and Native American
history.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In designating
national
parks?
JULIET EILPERIN: Yes, and
highlighting it
as part of the Park Service.
And these two are a mix, but,
primarily, they're
a land management land, but
basically trying
to say, this is all of our
history and this
is part of what it means to be
American.
So, in many ways, that's what's
most important.
In other senses, it does connect
to his more
-- his legacy, because he's
talked about climate
change.
When they were describing this
monument, White
House officials talked about,
this will create
resiliency to climate impacts,
corridors for
wildlife.
So, there are other reasons why
it matters.
And he's really come to focus
more on public
lands and public waters in his
second term.
While he's done climate change
from the beginning,
this was not as much of a
priority in his
first term.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I know that
not all conservationists
think that Obama gets an A-plus.
How do you think his legacy is
going to be
measured by history?
JULIET EILPERIN: Right.
Of course, on one level, we
certainly do need
to see whether things get
reversed over time.
And that applies whether you're
talking about
some of his climate policies
regarding power
plants, or whether you're
talking about this.
I think there is no question
that he is one
of the most consequential
presidents when
it comes to the environment.
He has really made it a
centerpiece of his
domestic policy and even his
foreign policy.
And so I think that, when people
look back,
they will see that he really
focused on this
intently, particularly as he saw
his term
coming to a close.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There is only
a couple more
weeks left.
Do you think he's done
designating lands?
JULIET EILPERIN: I don't think
he's done yet.
There are a few different ones
they're looking
at.
They're looking at expanding a
couple existing
monuments that were created
earlier, including
the California Coastal National
Monument,
as well as the Cascade-Siskiyou
Monument in
Oregon.
And there are certainly, if I
had to lay bets
there, a couple of historic
monuments they're
looking at, including one that
would highlight
civil rights history in -- two
in Alabama
that would speak to that.
There's also a long-shot one in
South Carolina
addressing Reconstruction.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Juliet Eilperin
of The Washington Post, thank
you so much.
JULIET EILPERIN: Thanks so much,
William.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Tomorrow, our
series The
Obama Years continues with a
review of the
president's education policies.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, watch
a book conversation about the
history of our
national parks.
Plus, meet a man who planned to
visit all
59 parks in 59 weeks to
celebrate the 100th
anniversary of the National Park
Service last
year.
All that and more is at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
The discovery of mass graves or
other evidence
of war crimes poses several
challenges, chief
among them, bringing the alleged
war criminals
to court.
According to former United
States Justice
Department official Allan Ryan,
the recent
introduction of what's known as
universal
jurisdiction has made it easier
to prosecute
these suspected war criminals.
ALLAN RYAN, Former U.S. Justice
Department
Official: Universal jurisdiction
is not a
universal concept yet.
It allows trials to be held
where otherwise
they might not be.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In France,
universal jurisdiction
has made it possible for a
husband and wife
to pursue alleged war criminals
behind the
1994 Rwandan genocide.
Special correspondent Jonathan
Silvers has
that story.
JONATHAN SILVERS: For the past
15 years, Dafroza
Gauthier has risen at first
light to probe
the Rwandan genocide and track
down fugitive
perpetrators, notably the
slaughter's architects
and executioners.
Gauthier was born and raised in
Rwanda and,
until recently, worked in the
chemical industry.
But she has become a formidable
war crimes
investigator, by necessity.
DAFROZA GAUTHIER, War Crimes
Investigator
(through translator): We began
by collecting
information and testimony from
our close friends
and families.
But the more we heard their
stories, the more
we knew that something had to be
done.
JONATHAN SILVERS: Dafroza
Gauthier has only
one memento of her family, this
photo of her
mother, who was murdered along
with scores
of relatives in the spring of
1994.
Gauthier was living in Belgium
when the genocide
began, and she learned about her
family members'
demise in real time, via a
series of phone
calls to her native village in
Rwanda.
The violence was rooted in
longstanding ethnic
division between the governing
Hutu majority
and the Tutsi minority.
In the space of 100 days,
roughly 800,000
men, women, and children were
killed, mostly
ethnic Tutsi and moderate Hutus.
DAFROZA GAUTHIER (through
translator): One
day, people should ask the
question why the
world abandoned the Tutsis in
Rwanda.
There are nation, states,
politicians who
should ask forgiveness of the
Rwandan people.
JONATHAN SILVERS: To date,
Gauthier and her
associates have tracked down
roughly 30 fugitive
perpetrators of the genocide in
France and
its territories.
The dossiers on these
perpetrators, known
here in France as genocidaires,
grow larger
by the week.
DAFROZA GAUTHIER (through
translator): One
case can take two, three or four
years by
the time we collect the
evidence.
But what has to be denounced
today is why
is the public prosecutor is not
investigating.
Why is the public prosecutor
waiting for civil
plaintiffs like us to find the
evidence?
The public prosecutor should do
its job of
justice.
It shouldn't be our job.
JONATHAN SILVERS: The
investigative work is
a partnership, consecrated by 37
years of
marriage.
Alain Gauthier met Dafroza in
Rwanda, where
Alain taught French in a foreign
aid program.
A native Frenchman and retired
high school
principal, he's learned to
navigate the bureaucracy
that is the French legal system.
Together, he and wife
established an organization,
the Civil Parties Collective for
Rwanda, to
secure legal status as
plaintiffs in civil
suits.
ALAIN GAUTHIER, War Crimes
Investigator (through
translator): We were forced to
investigate
ourselves, because the public
prosecutor never
pressed charges.
All the cases concerning the
murder of Tutsis
in Rwanda came solely through
the will of
the plaintiffs.
JONATHAN SILVERS: After years of
legal wrangling,
a senior figure in the Rwandan
genocide faced
French justice for the first
time in February
2014.
The Gauthiers have filed a civil
action that
led the justice ministry to
prosecute the
defendant, Pascal Simbikangwa.
Simbikangwa held a senior
position in the
Rwandan state security service
in the 1990s.
Despite being paralyzed from the
waste down
during the genocide, he helped
arm the Hutu
militia and organized roadblocks
where thousands
of fleeing Tutsi were murdered.
The Gauthiers found him living
under an assumed
name in the French territory of
Mayotte in
the Indian Ocean.
He'd fled there after the
genocide and survived
by forging identity documents.
French authorities arrested him
in 2008.
ALAIN GAUTHIER (through
translator): In some
cases, we had to travel three,
four or five
times to Rwanda to take as much
testimony
as possible.
Then, all that testimony had to
be translated.
The testimony has to be
organized and given
to our lawyers to draft a
complaint.
Every case requires a large
amount of work.
That's hard for plaintiffs like
us, who are
not trained for this type of
work.
JONATHAN SILVERS: The Gauthiers'
pursuit of
fugitive perpetrators has forced
France to
examine its conduct both during
and after
the genocide.
France had close relations with
the Hutu-led
regime that carried out the
slaughter.
In the aftermath, Rwanda's
post-genocide government
has accused France of
complicity, obstructing
the escape of Hutu killers, and
harboring
fugitives.
Most recently, the European
Human Rights Court
condemned France for excessive
delays in investigating
suspected genocidaires.
Preliminary investigations
against one suspect
took nine years to reach court.
These chronic delays outraged
Rwandan survivors
in France, like Marcel Kabanda,
a historian
specializing in genocide
studies.
MARCEL KABANDA, Historian
(through translator):
For 20 years, we asked ourselves
if France
wasn't becoming a paradise for
Rwandan war
criminals.
France must not be the country
that gives
impunity to the killers behind
the genocide.
JONATHAN SILVERS: The effort to
bring Rwanda
genocidaires to justice was
bolstered in 2010
by a modification to the French
penal code
permitting the prosecution of
major crimes
committed outside France.
This type of prosecution is
better known as
universal jurisdiction,
according to Allan
Ryan, the U.S. government's
former chief war
crimes prosecutor.
ALLAN RYAN: Universal
jurisdiction is a concept
and in some countries a law that
says, this
country will have jurisdiction
over genocide,
war crimes, crimes against
humanity, no matter
where in the world they might
have taken place,
no matter where in the world or
in the world
they might have involved.
It's a departure from what
international jurisdiction
has been from the beginning of
the international
system 350 years ago that says
there has to
be some connection between the
country and
the trial, the victims have to
be your citizens,
or the venue of the trial has to
be where
the crime took place, or in some
way there
has to be a tie between the
country and the
crime.
JONATHAN SILVERS: Pascal
Simbikangwa was the
first Rwandan prosecuted for
genocide in France
under the new universal
jurisdiction law.
The landmark trial attracted
legions of survivors
and their supporters.
Throughout the trial and
appellate process,
the defendant maintained his
innocence.
As the defendant's public
advocate, Fabrice
Epstein crafted a defense based
on reasonable
doubt, emphasizing the 20-year
interval between
the alleged crime and the French
trial.
FABRICE EPSTEIN, Attorney for
Pascal Simbikangwa:
This is, for me, an act of
courage to say
that I believe this person.
I believe that, when there's a
genocide, there
could be innocent people.
This one is, so I will defend
him.
JONATHAN SILVERS: The case has
particular
significance for Epstein.
He's Jewish and the grandson of
a Holocaust
survivor.
FABRICE EPSTEIN: I spoke with
the client about
my origins, about my family, of
course.
And he knows that it's really
important for
me that he doesn't lie, because,
when we're
talking about genocide, it's
something really
deep.
It reminds me what my people
went through.
JONATHAN SILVERS: The first
trial ended in
2014 with Simbikangwa's
conviction for genocide
and complicity in crimes against
humanity.
The appellate court upheld the
conviction.
Simbikangwa will now serve a
25-year prison
sentence.
Following the Simbikangwa trial,
two more
Rwandan fugitives located by the
Gauthiers
have been prosecuted in France.
Both were convicted and
sentenced to life
imprisonment.
These legal victories have
energized the Gauthiers.
They now devote all of their
time to tracking
down fugitive genocidaires and
filing new
cases with the court system.
A small amount of funding
provided by the
state and their supporters has
proven inadequate,
and they have depleted their own
savings to
continue this work.
DAFROZA GAUTHIER (through
translator): Is
justice possible?
Yes.
But, like mankind, it's not
perfect.
We accept it so we can continue
our work for
everyone, for future
generations, for victims,
and even for the executioners.
JONATHAN SILVERS: Reporting from
France, this
is Jonathan Silvers for the "PBS
NewsHour."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Jonathan
Silvers is the
producer and director of "Dead
Reckoning,"
a PBS documentary series on
postwar justice
that's premiering on March 28.
a PBS documentary series on
postwar justice
that's premiering on March 28.
We're increasingly cataloging
our lives online,
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
seemingly endless
YouTube videos.
It's a digital-first and often
digital-only
world.
The advantages of this unlimited
digital storage
seem obvious, but how permanent
are some of
those records?
How do we preserve digital
history?
Jeffrey Brown has the story,
part of our ongoing
series Culture at Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this is like
an ancient
temple come to life in a modern
age.
BREWSTER KAHLE, Founder,
Internet Archive:
In a modern day.
It's a Greek-style building,
which we loved,
because the whole idea is the
Library of Alexandria
reborn now.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's an ancient
idea: to gather
and preserve the world's
knowledge.
But now that library will look
like this.
These stacks of servers,
Brewster Kahle told
me recently, represent a 20-year
and running
effort to build a kind of
digital library,
and to essentially back up the
ever-expanding
World Wide Web.
BREWSTER KAHLE: In one of these
would be 100
years of a channel of
television.
Or this much is all of the words
in the Library
of Congress.
We need to be able to preserve
our digital
history.
JEFFREY BROWN: Kahle was an
early Internet
entrepreneur who in 1996 founded
the Internet
Archive, a nonprofit that
operates out of
an old Christian Science church
in San Francisco.
It was designed to address a
fundamental flaw
in the original creation of the
World Wide
Web by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989.
BREWSTER KAHLE: The wonder of it
is, it's
very, very simple.
Anybody could go and set up a
web server on
their computer and make it
available to the
world.
Unfortunately, it's too simple.
It's fragile, that if something
happens to
that piece of equipment, that
Web site just,
blink, is gone.
JEFFREY BROWN: If it's online,
it lives forever,
right?
Well, no.
Kahle says the average lifespan
of a Web page
is just 92 days.
Information is altered and
deleted all the
time for all kinds of reasons.
A 2013 Harvard study, for
example, found that
half the hyperlinks in Supreme
Court cases,
today's equivalent of footnotes,
are broken,
a phenomena known as link rot.
Government agencies remove
documents, and
companies fail, and with them
the sites they
host.
Think of GeoCities, Yahoo!
Video, and, more recently, the
news site Gawker.
ABBY SMITH RUMSEY, Author, "When
We Are No
More: How Digital Memory Is
Shaping Our Future":
People mistake the fact that the
Internet
is ubiquitous with the fact that
it's permanent.
JEFFREY BROWN: Abby Smith Rumsey
is the author
of "When We Are No More: How
Digital Memory
Is Shaping Our Future."
She began her scholarly career
studying how
information was purposely
deleted in the totalitarian
Soviet system.
These days, she thinks, we have
a new kind
of storage and retrieval
problem.
ABBY SMITH RUMSEY: It isn't
permanent at all.
And, in fact, the thing about
digital technology
is, you can inscribe something
onto a computer,
but you can't put it on a shelf
and expect
to pick it out at random at 50,
let alone
500, years, and be able to read
it.
In fact, you won't have the
hardware or the
software to do that.
So, it's very fragile, indeed.
JEFFREY BROWN: And while there
might be plenty
online not worth saving, Rumsey
sees much
higher stakes.
ABBY SMITH RUMSEY: I think we're
losing obviously
the past, but by saying that
we're losing
the past, the record of the
past, we're saying
that, in a sense, we're losing
our own memory
and sense of who we are.
JEFFREY BROWN: Brewster Kahle's
answer?
The Wayback Machine, fancifully
named for
a feature on the old "Rocky and
Bullwinkle
Show."
There, a genius dog named Mr.
Peabody took
his adopted boy, Sherman, back
in time to
better understand key historical
events.
MARK GRAHAM, Director, The
Wayback Machine:
We have been collecting captures
of the public
Web for the last 20 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mark Graham,
director of the
new Wayback Machine, says it's
already saved
more than 500 billion Web
captures in its
20-year history.
MARK GRAHAM: We have software
that's referred
to as crawlers or spiders that
go out and
go to individual Web pages, look
at those
Web pages, look at all of the
links on those
pages and then go to those
pages, look at
all the links on those pages,
and then goes
to those pages, et cetera, et
cetera.
So, kind of like a spider
crawling on the
Web, the software goes out and
discovers what's
available.
JEFFREY BROWN: Users can then
visit Web pages
at different points in their
history, seeing
how they looked before they were
altered or
deleted.
MARK GRAHAM: We're a library,
and so we don't
really try to like figure out
what it is people
may want.
We just want to have as much as
we can of
what's available, because we
know that people
are probably going to want these
things.
JEFFREY BROWN: Exactly what the
archive saves
is determined by popularity, the
number of
references or links to that
page, and by some
1,000 librarians and experts
around the globe
working in concert with the
Internet Archive.
Case in point, in July 2014,
Russian-backed
rebels claimed to have shot down
a military
plane over Ukraine, until it
became clear
the jet was a passenger
airliner, with 283
people killed.
MARK GRAHAM: So, what we're
seeing here is
a capture, actually one out of
the 38 captures
of a post made on a Russian
social media site
by a pro-Russian rebel who was
boasting about
shooting down a plane at the
same time that
MH-17 was shot down.
And this was removed within a
few hours after
it was posted.
And as far as we know, these are
the only
captures of this Web page that
exist.
JEFFREY BROWN: These kinds of
pages have in
some cases even been used as
evidence in courts.
The Internet Archive's home is a
strange world:
several generations of media and
technology,
stained glass windows and church
pews, and
almost eerie rows of sculptures
of the many
people who've worked on the
project.
Its motto is universal access to
all knowledge,
and Kahle's aspirations could
hardly reach
higher.
BREWSTER KAHLE: The idea is to
build the Library
of Alexandria, version two.
Could we make all the published
works of humankind,
books, music, video, Web pages,
software,
available to anybody who wanted
to have access
to them anywhere in the world?
JEFFREY BROWN: Today, the
project is digitizing
films, books, video games,
software, even
round-the-clock television news
channels.
The original Library of
Alexandria is thought
to date to around 295 B.C.
When and how it was destroyed is
still much
debated, but the loss of so much
of the classical
world's greatest works is beyond
debate.
BREWSTER KAHLE: The best thing
to learn from
the Library of Alexandria,
version one, is
don't just have one copy.
If we had had another copy in
India, or in
China, we'd have the other works
of Aristotle,
the other plays of Euripides.
But we don't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Not to mention so
many other
things that were just lost.
We don't even know what we don't
have.
BREWSTER KAHLE: We don't even
know what they
were.
And they're just -- they're --
they're gone.
And some people think it's --
say it's good
to forget.
And I'm sure there's good things
to forget,
but there's a lot that we should
have remembered
and kept alive.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's a lot
more to be done.
Kahle and his group are teaming
with companies
like Mozilla and Wikipedia to
make preservation
of Web pages more automatic.
They're also working on ways to
make the Wayback
Machine more easily searchable.
And, of course, copyright reform
remains an
important ongoing question in
any attempt
to create a true global library.
Twenty years in, Kahle is
impatient.
BREWSTER KAHLE: Why aren't all
of the books
in all of the libraries already
digital?
JEFFREY BROWN: And why aren't
they?
BREWSTER KAHLE: I think it's
that institutions
don't know what roles they're
supposed to
play going forward.
They knew what it was when they
were supposed
to buy books and put them on
shelves, but
now, do they do their own
digital services?
Do they wait for somebody else
to do it and
subscribe to it?
I'm hoping that, by at least
2020, all right,
so in three, four years from
now, we're not
talking about, wouldn't it be
great to build
a complete digital library of
the Library
of Congress online?
We say, OK, that's done.
Now what do we do?
How do we go and make the next
better services?
How do we make a global brain?
How to we go and make it so that
Nobel scientists
are using these vast resources
to go and make
new discoveries?
I think we only have pieces now.
JEFFREY BROWN: Billions of
pieces, with billions
more being collected all the
time.
From San Francisco, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Now we turn to
our "NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
might be of interest to you as
well.
When J'Nai Bridges' dream of
playing professional
sports suddenly fell apart, she
focused intently
on developing her singing voice.
Now the mezzo-soprano is
performing major
roles for some of the world's
most renowned
opera companies.
She recently spoke with Claudia
Escobar and
Chloe Veltman of KQED in San
Francisco.
J'NAI BRIDGES, Singer: I fell in
love with
classical singing.
And I like to say that opera
chose me, because
I didn't grow up listening to it
or going
to the opera.
My basketball career ended kind
of dramatically,
and it was the same time that I
discovered
singing.
And it just opened up this whole
new world.
I was in high school, my last
year in high
school, and I had to take an
elective, an
arts elective.
And so I chose to be in the
choir.
I joined the choir.
And my choir teacher, she
noticed that I had
a gift.
From having not grown up singing
classically,
I think most people would
probably -- just
wouldn't even give it a chance
or a thought.
But my parents did everything
that they could
for us, and one of them being
that we just
stay open to whatever life
brings us.
Channeling the
different emotions of these
characters is
a lot like channeling emotions
of myself.
Practice.
Practice, practice, practice,
because there
is a lot of luck, but when
opportunity meets
being prepared, that's what luck
is.
I mean, you just have to be
ready.
Music is so healing.
And I think it's this universal
language that,
that even if you don't
understand the language,
you don't really have a
background in music,
everyone can identify with it.
I love the fact that I have this
gift to sing
and touch people.
I love the fact that I have this
gift to sing
and touch people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Tuesday, Judy Woodruff
returns, and our
series The Obama Years
continues.
We talk to CIA Director John
Brennan and review
President Obama's education
policies.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
I'm William Brangham.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.